_Synthetic biology is an interdisciplinary field of science where mathematics, biology and social sciences are integrated into an engineering-like methodology. These constituent sciences represent vital parts of the process necessary in order to ensure a safe and morally acceptable outcome. This unique and somewhat novel way of conducting research is highly successful and should be implemented ubiquitously, below I’ll explain why. _

Synthetic biology embraces several disciplines of science and engineering, the most prevalent being biology and mathematics. Biology constitutes the essence of the field, and many practitioners see themselves as just that. However, what dichotomizes a biologists from a synthetic biologist is more than what first meets the eye, and ultimately it’s easier to find differences than similarities between the two. The biologist strives after increasing the knowledge about the ecosystem and the individuals therein, the biological structures and molecular pathways as parts of the whole. Zoology, ecology, botany, molecular biology, microbiology, anatomy, physiology, cell biology, marine biology, mycology, evolutionary biology, genetics and proteomics (the list goes on…). Understanding how nature works is fundamental and the more complex and microscopically defined the better. For most synthetic biologists, however, definitions and complex systems are confusing, and ultimately, simplification and more abstract classification is key. That a system works is often times more important than exactly how it works. Although, note that the knowledge gained from biologists is absolutely crucial for synthetic biologists since a castle can’t be built without bricks. But how does a synthetic biologists come up with, and find the relevant bricks? The answer is found in the ‘parts registry’. The registry is an online, open-source website where researchers submit biological parts. You may think of it as a LEGO-brick-catalogue, where all the LEGOs are listed alongside some fundamental information of e.g. compatibility with other bricks or their use in previously built LEGO-sets.

Biologists and synthetic biologists don’t seem so similar anymore, and they do indeed diverge further. Typical biologists only include fundamental mathematical principles in their arsenal and tend to stay away from complicated equations. This opposes the fundament of synthetic biology, where mathematics plays an indispensable role. As noted earlier, a synthetic biologists is drawn towards simplification and abstraction. This is partly because of our current restriction on computing power and knowledge needed to predict the outcome if we were to identify every single gene and molecule involved in the system. We wish only to recognize the patterns and trends of the system, which brings us to the field of mathematics. Pattern recognition and predictions can be expressed through equations. Increase the translation rate due to a sleek new promoter and see what happens with your system - all with the power of differential equations, no wet-lab is needed. By utilizing the mathematical toolbox the synthetic biologists saves resources and is prepared for the challenges it may face in the laboratory. The researchers can also apply their system in unknown environments by changing parameters, supporting their biological model using experimental data found in their lab to verify it’s workings.

The most unorthodox constituent of the field is the social sciences, and frankly, it’s not implemented to its completion just yet. However, a major contributor of research within the field is iGEM (international Genetically Engineered Machine) which is a competition for students within the field of synthetic biology. The competition has grown to play a major role in the development of the field, and indeed, the founding fathers and mothers of the competition also lay the ground for the field itself. iGEM has ‘Human Practice’ as a pillar of success for competing projects, a novel idea in the realm of natural sciences. The implementation of social sciences is partly due to the huge societal impact inventions and research created by synthetic biologists is bound to have on the future of mankind, and a recognition of ethical and moral contemplation is needed to ensure a prosperous future, but also due to the importance of knowing what ought to be done, not just what could be done.

Another unique aspect of the field lies within its inherent philosophy of open-access and open-source-biology. The fundamental idea that biological parts and systems should be available to everyone, and that the progress is to be documented, revised and regulated by the researchers themselves. This concept is commonplace in computer programming and newer branches of engineering. It allows for quick decision-making and development since the practitioners and experts of the field already bears the knowledge that a jurisdictional expert would have had to acquire during months.

These sub-fields of synthetic biology, together with its engineering like philosophy is what makes synthetic biologists so proficient in producing innovations and research. They’re equipped with an arsenal of bricks and merely need to find configurations that suit their needs. Not only are synthetic biologists innovation-producing-machines, but due to their involvement in social sciences and human practice, their research tends to be highly focused on the good of mankind and life on earth. By now you’ve understood how synthetic biologists differ from biologists, and how they in fact, are more like computer programmers, although programming organic matter instead of code.
